



Internet Engineering Task Force                             S. Gros, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                             L. Jelenkovic
Intended status: Informational                                 D. Skvorc
Expires: May 26, 2016                               University of Zagreb
                                                       November 23, 2015


           DHCP configuration in MIF and associated IPR claim
               draft-sgros-dhcp-and-ipr-claim-analysis-00

Abstract

   The purpose of this draft is to analyze different options on how DHCP
   can be used to configure PvD aware client.  This is done in light of
   IPR claim made by Huawei and the necessity to find an option for
   implementation.  In order for an option to be selected it obviously
   must not interfere with the IPR made by Huawei, or, the IPR has to be
   somehow invalidated.  We also analyse IPR made by Huawei in order to
   compare it to MIF proposal for DHCP configuration and to assess how
   relevant this IPR claim is.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 26, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Gros, et al.              Expires May 26, 2016                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                DHCP_and_IPR                 November 2015


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Analysis of the IPR Claim made by Huawei  . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Detailed analysis of the protocol part  . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.2.  Detailed analysis of the implementation part  . . . . . .   6
     3.3.  Differences between the patent and draft-ietf-mif-mpvd-
           dhcp-support  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.4.  Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.  Options for PvD provisioning  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.1.  DHCP Container Option . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.2.  Using DHCP INFORM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12

1.  Introduction

   At IETF94 MIF Working Group decided to abandon drafts written so far
   and to wait for implementations that would serve as a basis for a new
   drafts [MIFminutes94].  One of the problems was the IPR claim made by
   Huawei [HuaweiIPRClaim].

   This document has two purposes.  The first is to identify the best
   path to follow for the implementation of client configuration using
   DHCP in a presence of multiple provisioning domains.  The second is
   to present analysis of the IPR claim made by Huawei in order to see
   how it influences possible solutions.  Since the licensing terms are
   too strict it is mandatory to avoid conflict with the given patent.

   This draft contains three core sections.  In Section 2 the
   requirements on the final solution are given.  It is very important
   to agree on those in order to have criteria on which different
   solutions can be analyzed.  Then, in Section 3 we do a thorough
   analysis of the IPR claim made by Huawei and also we analyse how it
   relates to the existing proposal.  Finally, in Section 3 we present




Gros, et al.              Expires May 26, 2016                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                DHCP_and_IPR                 November 2015


   different possibilities and analyze each one of them based on
   requirements defined and IPR claim made by Huawei.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

2.  Requirements

   The solution to be defined and used has to fulfill the following
   requirements:

   o  No IPR claims.  The solution MUST be free of IPR claims, or if
      there are any IPR claims then they MUST be licensed in such a way
      to allow unrestricted implementations without any fees.

   o  Backwards compatibility.  The solution MUST be be backwards
      compatible.  This means that the old clients upon seeing messages
      defined by the DHCP solution must ignore it and correctly function
      without knowing for those messages.

   o  Efficiency of implementation.  The solution SHOULD be as efficient
      as possible for the implementation.  This means, for example, that
      messages defined by the final specification should be constructed
      in such a way to make an implementation as simple as possible.

   o  Efficiency of communication.  The solution SHOULD be as efficient
      as possible for communication.  This means, for example, that as
      few messages as possible should be necessary in order for the
      client to be fully configured.

3.  Analysis of the IPR Claim made by Huawei

   Before continuing a big DISCLAIMER.  No lawyer has participated in
   the development of the following text so you should take a note that
   this is only an engineering view of a potentialy very complex
   problem.

   The IPR claim made by Huawei [HuaweiIPRClaim] is based on US Patent
   #US20140344421 [US20140344421].  The abstract of a given patent
   describes what is the patent about:

      A method for configuring a DHCPv6 client is provided.  The method
      includes: a DHCPv6 client receiving a DHCPv6 advertisement message
      sent by a network device having a DHCPv6 function, the DHCPv6
      advertisement message comprising a management domain identifier of



Gros, et al.              Expires May 26, 2016                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                DHCP_and_IPR                 November 2015


      the network device; if the DHCPv6 client does not save the
      management domain identifier, the DHCPv6 client sending a DHCPv6
      request message to the network device; the DHCPv6 client receiving
      a DHCPv6 response message sent by the network device and
      completing configuration of the DHCPv6 client.  A DHCPv6 client, a
      network device, and a network system are also provided.  Through
      the technical solution, multiple network devices supporting a
      DHCPv6 server function can configure the same DHCPv6 client, so as
      to provide technical support for realizing IPv6 client and network
      multi-homing.

   In the given paragraph, there are two key pieces of information:

   1.  The term "management domain identifier".

   2.  The last sentence which places the mechanism described by the
       patent into a context where it is used.

   These two key parts are in direct correlation with the mechanism to
   configure MPvDs as described in [I-D.ietf-mif-mpvd-dhcp-support].
   Namely, "management domain identifier" is basically PVD_ID and the
   last sentence describes multi-homing environment, which basically
   MPvD is also.  Note that "multi-homing environment" can be achieved
   on a single network with multiple ISPs and multiple networks, each
   with its own ISP.  The context of the patent is the former one, while
   of the MPvD is the latter one.  To see that the MPvD context is a
   sinle ISP per each physical and/or virtual network one should take a
   look at Section 4 of MIF Architecture Document [RFC7556].  In no case
   there is situation in which two or more sets of configuration
   parameters are received on a _single_ link, thus creating race
   condition situation, i.e. the first configuration set of parameters
   that reaches client, wins.  This is very important distinction.

   In the following subsections we analyze separately two different
   parts of the patent, protocol part (Exibits 1 and 2) and the
   implementation part (Exibit 3).  Protocol part is the more important,
   but implementation is also very important due to the patentability
   requirements [algorithmspatentable].

3.1.  Detailed analysis of the protocol part

   Figure 1 in the patent claim describes scenario of client
   configuration via DHCPv6 from the client's perspective when patented
   configuration mechanism is used.  Figure 3 shows the same, but from
   the server's perspective.  According to the given description the
   following sequence of steps happens:





Gros, et al.              Expires May 26, 2016                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                DHCP_and_IPR                 November 2015


   1.  Upon client sending SOLICIT message, DHCPv6 server sends
       ADVERTISE message.  This message includes an option that defines
       "management domain identifier".  Additional rules are mentioned
       later in the text concerning the SOLICIT message:

       1.  Paragraph [0045] says that client sends SOLICIT message but
           _without_ an option "management domain identifier".
           Furthermore, judging by the [0045], DHCPv6 server MUST
           include "management domain identifier".

       2.  In paragraph [0050] it says further that when client receives
           SOLICIT message with previously unknown "management domain
           identifier" then "the DHCPv6 client may send the DHCPv6
           request message to the network device and store the
           management domain identifier of the network device.  The
           DHCPv6 request message is adapted to request the network
           device to configure the DHCPv6 client."

       3.  Then, paragraph [0046] contradicts paragraph [0045] by saying
           that "management domain identifier" doesn't have to be
           included.  Yet, in that case the question is what makes so
           special this patent from regular DHCPv6 exchange.

       4.  Also, in paragraph [0046] it says that the "management domain
           identifier" defines to WHICH MANAGEMENT DOMAIN NETWORK DEVICE
           BELONGS.  According to this, "management domain identifier"
           identifies some management domain and not a set of
           configuration parameters that can belong to some management
           domain.  This is emphasised by explicitly saying that "...
           management domain identifier may be a name of an ISP or a
           name of an organization."

   2.  Client sends REQUEST message.  There are few problems with the
       description in this part:

       1.  There is ambiguity here as it doesn't specify weather client
           sends "management domain identifier" option in REQUEST or
           not.

       2.  It sounds like there is unfinished sentence here.  Namely,
           this part in the patent application says:

              [0043] 104: The DHCPv6 client sends a DHCPv6 request
              message to the network device and stores the management
              domain identifier, when the client does not store the
              management domain identifier.





Gros, et al.              Expires May 26, 2016                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                DHCP_and_IPR                 November 2015


           Note the last part of the sentence, "when the client does not
           store the management domain identifier".  It doesn't make any
           sense!  Reading through the later text (specifically
           paragraph [0050]) it seems to be a C/P error.  Upon further
           thinking, it seems possible that it isn't an C/P error but it
           says that client stores "management domain identifier" when
           it doesn't have it already.

       3.  The patent application doesn't define what happens when
           client sends REQUEST message to multicast address which is
           received by all other DHCP servers, i.e. what other DHCP
           servers not belonging to a given management domain do.

   3.  As the final step DHCPv6 client receives configuration data in a
       REPLY message.  This part is underwritten/underspecified.  To see
       that here is quote from the relevant part of the patent:

          [0044] 106: The DHCPv6 client receives a DHCPv6 reply message
          from the network device and configures the DHCPv6 client
          according to the DHCPv6 reply message.  The DHCPv6 reply
          message includes an IPv6 prefix assigned to the DHCPv6 client
          by the network device and a network configuration parameter
          assigned to the DHCPv6 client by the network device; or the
          DHCPv6 reply message includes an IPv6 address assigned to the
          DHCPv6 client by the net work device and a network
          configuration parameters assigned to the DHCPv6 client by the
          network device.

       First, it says that IPv6 address or IPv6 prefix MUST be present
       in the configuration message.  Also, if IPv6 prefix is present
       than a single network configuration parameter is assigned, while
       if it is IPv6 address then "a network configuration parameters"
       are present.  In paragraph [0050] both are assumed to have a
       single parameter!

3.2.  Detailed analysis of the implementation part

   Figures 4 and 5 in the patent claim show implementation of the given
   patent.  The reason for this is that protocols (which are in essence
   distributed algorithms) can not be patented [algorithmspatentable].

   Looking at the figures presented in the patent, there is no
   difference between the implementations that support "management
   domain identifier" and existing ones that don't support it.  So, the
   question is what makes this proposed implementation in the patent so
   special?  In other words, if no special implementation is necessary,
   then this implies that the patent isn't so special/new after all.




Gros, et al.              Expires May 26, 2016                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                DHCP_and_IPR                 November 2015


3.3.  Differences between the patent and draft-ietf-mif-mpvd-dhcp-
      support

   There are differences between the patent and the solution as proposed
   in the draft:

   1.  "Management domain" while isn't defined by the patent isn't used
       to identify set of a configuration parameters, but a whole domain
       managed by some authority.  PvD, on the other hand, identifies a
       set of configuration parameters no matter to whom they belong.

   2.  The context of the patent is a single network with multipe ISPs,
       while the context of MIF is multiple connections, each with a
       single ISP.

   3.  Option with "management domain ID" is like any other option, i.e.
       it is not a container for the other options as in MPvD DHCP
       proposal.

   4.  In the given patent there is 1 to 1 mapping between DHCP server
       and management domain.  In MPvD, on the contrary, one DHCP server
       can host multiple provisioning domains.

   5.  As per the patent only ADVERTISE message has "management domain
       identifier" option included.

   6.  In the patent application management IDs are sent without being
       requested by the client.  So, in case the client explicitly
       requests different management domain the patent doesn't apply.

   7.  The mechanism in patent, as described, couldn't be implemented
       without first resolving some issues not defined precisely enough.
       (the case when client sends REQUEST on multicast address,
       possibly without "management domain identifier" - it is not clean
       how DHCP server belonging to other domains should react)

   8.  The patent doesn't explicitly specify anything else being part of
       "management domain" other then IPv6 address or prefix.

   9.  The patent specifies that IPv6 address or prefix must be in
       response.

3.4.  Conclusion

   The first conclusion is that this patent actually patents an
   algorithm, and since algorithms aren't patentable than the patent
   itself is invalid.




Gros, et al.              Expires May 26, 2016                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                DHCP_and_IPR                 November 2015


   The second conclusion is that introducing a configuration option with
   PVD_ID that functions as a container for other options isn't in
   collision with the given patent.

4.  Options for PvD provisioning

   The first step towards the selection of a possible solution is to
   enumeration all the options.

   For a start, there MUST be a way for a network to convey information
   about specific PvD to a client.  The most natural way of doing this
   is via DHCP and it can be done either implicitly or explicitly, and
   if explicitly furthermore it can be done directly or indirectly:

   o  Implicit.  The information that the parameters within a message
      belong to some particular PvD isn't contained within DHCP message
      itself but somewhere outside of it.  This isn't an option since
      DHCP is used for network configuration and by placing related
      information somewhere else interleaves DHCP with something else.
      This in turn, complicates implementations and breaks layering
      rules.

   o  Explicit.  The information that certain parameters within the
      message belong to some specific PvD is contained within the
      message itself.

   o  Direct.  All the necessary information necessary to identify PvD
      are placed within the DHCP message.

   o  Indirect.  Information about PvD isn't fully contained within DHCP
      message but has to be obtained by some other mean.

   When information about PvD is explicit then it can be done in the
   following ways, first four of which are explicit while the last one
   is implicit:

   1.  A single option within DHCP message can define PvD the whole
       message belongs to.  This approach has two problems.  The first
       is backwards compatibility.  Clients not aware of PvD will be
       confused with multiple configuration parameters.  The second
       problem is that it resembles the IPR claim made by Huawei and
       analyzed in the previous section.

   2.  Prefixing each option with an option that identifies PvD to which
       the given option belongs to.  This approach has the problem of
       bloating DHCP message, and also there is a problem with backwards
       compatibility.




Gros, et al.              Expires May 26, 2016                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                DHCP_and_IPR                 November 2015


   3.  Defining separate set of configuration options in which each
       contains PVD_ID and appropriate option.  The problem with this
       approach is the number of options that should be duplicated.

   4.  Using container option which holds all the options specific for a
       given PvD.  This approach was used in the existing proposal of
       PvD configuration using DHCP messages
       [I-D.ietf-mif-mpvd-dhcp-support].

   5.  There is an indicator within DHCP message about availability of
       other PvDs.  When PvD aware client receives such message, it
       requests additional configuration options, e.g. by using DHCP
       INFORM messages.  DHCP INFORM messages could be used to obtain a
       list of all available PVD_IDs and to request specific PVD_IDs.
       This is an example of indirect configuration of a client.

4.1.  DHCP Container Option

   This approach is the same as the one proposed by
   [I-D.ietf-mif-mpvd-dhcp-support].

4.2.  Using DHCP INFORM

   In this approach during DHCP configuration client is only informed
   that there are different PvDs.  The exchange of messages is:

   1.  Client sends DHCP SOLICIT message with an option that specifys
       client's support of PvD.

   2.  Server sends DHCP ADVERTISE message with an option that specifys
       servers's support of PvD.

   3.  Client notes all the servers that support PvDs and sends DHCP
       REQUEST message to multicast address telling all DHCP servers
       which DHCP server for basic configuration parameters was
       selected.

   4.  Server send DHCP REPLY and confirms client's parameters.

   5.  Client issues DHCP INFORM REQUEST to each DHCP server that
       indicated support for PvDs.  This request includes no specific
       PvD.

   6.  Based on client's request. each server responds with a list of
       available PvDs.  Each element consits of PVD_ID and, if
       available, a link (like a Proxy configuration mechanism that
       contains URL) that points to the description of PvD (QoS,
       reachability).



Gros, et al.              Expires May 26, 2016                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                DHCP_and_IPR                 November 2015


   7.  Client selects PvDs and for each PvD sends DHCP INFORM REQUEST
       this time with a specific PVD ID.

   8.  Server responds with a configuration parameters for requested PVD
       ID.

5.  Acknowledgements

6.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.

   All drafts are required to have an IANA considerations section (see
   the update of RFC 2434 [I-D.narten-iana-considerations-rfc2434bis]
   for a guide).  If the draft does not require IANA to do anything, the
   section contains an explicit statement that this is the case (as
   above).  If there are no requirements for IANA, the section will be
   removed during conversion into an RFC by the RFC Editor.

7.  Security Considerations

   All drafts are required to have a security considerations section.
   See RFC 3552 [RFC3552] for a guide.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC6418]  Blanchet, M. and P. Seite, "Multiple Interfaces and
              Provisioning Domains Problem Statement", RFC 6418,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6418, November 2011,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6418>.

   [RFC6419]  Wasserman, M. and P. Seite, "Current Practices for
              Multiple-Interface Hosts", RFC 6419, DOI 10.17487/RFC6419,
              November 2011, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6419>.

   [RFC7556]  Anipko, D., Ed., "Multiple Provisioning Domain
              Architecture", RFC 7556, DOI 10.17487/RFC7556, June 2015,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7556>.






Gros, et al.              Expires May 26, 2016                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                DHCP_and_IPR                 November 2015


8.2.  Informative References

   [algorithmspatentable]
              StackExchange, "Can an algorithm be patented?", December
              2010,
              <http://programmers.stackexchange.com/questions/32482/
              can-an-algorithm-be-patented>.

   [HuaweiIPRClaim]
              Huawei Technologies Co., "Huawei Technologies Co.,Ltd's
              Statement about IPR related to draft-ietf-mif-mpvd-dhcp-
              support", August 2014, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/
              ipr/2648/>.

   [I-D.ietf-mif-mpvd-dhcp-support]
              Krishnan, S., Korhonen, J., and S. Bhandari, "Support for
              multiple provisioning domains in DHCPv6", draft-ietf-mif-
              mpvd-dhcp-support-02 (work in progress), October 2015.

   [I-D.narten-iana-considerations-rfc2434bis]
              Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", draft-narten-iana-
              considerations-rfc2434bis-09 (work in progress), March
              2008.

   [MIFminutes94]
              IETF94, "IETF 94th MIF minutes", November 2015,
              <https://www.ietf.org/proceedings/94/minutes/minutes-
              94-mif>.

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2629, June 1999,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2629>.

   [RFC3552]  Rescorla, E. and B. Korver, "Guidelines for Writing RFC
              Text on Security Considerations", BCP 72, RFC 3552,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3552, July 2003,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3552>.

   [US20140344421]
              Huawei Technologies Co., "Method for configuring dhcpv6
              client, dhcpv6 client, network device, and network
              system", August 2015,
              <http://www.google.com/patents/US20140344421>.







Gros, et al.              Expires May 26, 2016                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                DHCP_and_IPR                 November 2015


Authors' Addresses

   Stjepan Gros (editor)
   University of Zagreb
   Unska 3
   Zagreb  10000
   HR

   Email: stjepan.gros@fer.hr


   Leonardo Jelenkovic
   University of Zagreb
   Unska 3
   Zagreb  10000
   HR

   Email: leonardo.jelenkovic@fer.hr


   Dejan Skvorc
   University of Zagreb
   Unska 3
   Zagreb  10000
   HR

   Email: dejan.skvorc@fer.hr
























Gros, et al.              Expires May 26, 2016                 [Page 12]
